In this tutorial, we'll look at a new concept related to the behavior tree. It is called a service.
A service is a special class that can be added to the nodes of the behavior tree.
It has its own Tick function where we can put our game logic.
And, for example, under certain conditions in the game, change the keys in our blackboard.
In this logic, we will rewrite with you the logic of finding the enemy through the service, and when the NPC sees the enemy
, a point around the enemy character will be calculated randomly. And the NPC will run to this location.
Let's start by adding a new key to our blackboard. The key will be of type object.
We name the object EnemyActor. In this key, we will store a pointer to the current enemy.
Go to the behavior tree editor. In order to create a new service through the blueprint at the top,
you can click on the corresponding icon, which is called new service. We will create a C ++ service with you,
so go to the classes in the AI ​​folder. We create a new C ++ class.
We open all the classes and find Service in the search. We will inherit from the BTService class.
We name the class STUFindEnemyService and also specify a directory that we will call Services.
Completing the creation - click create class.
Do not forget to include an additional directory in the build file. Go to the service header file.
I immediately created a constructor for this service. In fact, it will be the same as the task - there will be the name of the node.
Let's add a protected section and declare a property that will store the key for our
enemy character. We use the FBlackboardKeySelector type. We name the variable EnemyActorKey.
The service has its own Tick function, and it is also possible to configure the update frequency of this function.
We'll look at all this later in the blueprint, but now let's press f12 on the base class
and in the header file we will find a function called TickNode. Let's override it in our child class.
The enemy search logic will be in this function. Go to the .cpp file.
In the constructor, we see that I named our service "Find Enemy". Assigned a value to the NodeName variable.
We create the body of the TickNode function. Let's copy the header files from the task class.
We also need a blackboard component, an AI controller. We insert into the header file of the service.
Additionally, we connect STUUtils.
We'll grab the perception component from the controller using our templated function.
I will also copy the component's perception header file. So, all the header files are ready. Let's get down to the code.
Let's go to the TickNode function. We, just like in the Task class, can get a pointer to the blackboard
and the controller through the BehaviorTreeComponent. The if statements, in which we will check
objects for nullptr, will be nested, because at the end we will need to call the base function Tick.
Therefore, we will not do a return after checking each object. So, we
get the blackboard through the GetBlackboardComponent function. Next, we get the controller through GetAIOwner.
After that, we get the perception component, which is in our controller.
If the perception component is nonzero,
then we can immediately write the value to the blackboard in the EnemyActorKey.
To do this, we will use the SetValueAsObject function. The first parameter is our key.
Let's use our EnemyActorKey structure and its SelectedKeyName field. The second parameter is a pointer to the UObject.
The actor is a UObject. This is its base class,
so we can pass the value that the GetClosestEnemy function returns.
And at the very end, we call the basic function TickNode. The enemy search service is ready.
In fact, we rewrote what we did in the last lesson in the AI ​​controller through a service.
After such a transformation, we will have access to the enemy both in the controller and in our behavior tree.
Let's edit the controller a little. Open the controller header file.
Let's create a property of type FName. In it we will store the name of the key, which contains a
pointer to the enemy character. We cannot specify FBlackboardKeySelector here
because the controller knows nothing about the keys. Let's call the variable FocusOnKeyName.
And assign it the "EnemyActor" value. This name in the blackboard has our key, which
stores a pointer to the enemy. And for convenience, let's create an additional function. The function will be
internal, so we create a private category. Let's call the function GetFocusOnActor. It will return a
pointer to the actor that we need to focus on. We create the body of the function.
We need the "BehaviorTree / BlackboardComponent.h" header file. Through it, we will directly receive this object.
Let's go to the GetFocusOnActor function.
We check - if GetBlackboardComponent () returns a null pointer, then we will also
return nullptr, that is, we have nothing to focus on.
And if the component is non-zero, then we can get the object using the GetValueAsObject function.
We pass property to the function, which stores the name of the key from the blackboard - FocusOnKeyName.
Does this function return a pointer to the base type UObject?
so we need to make Cast the given pointer to type actor.
And now we can, in the Tick function, assign the AimActor variable the value that our GetFocusOnActor function returns.
Our service is ready. We also tweaked the controller. Let's see how to add service to the behavior tree.
So, we have two options for the development of events: the first option is just
patrolling the territory. We have already implemented this option. We can call the sequence random roam.
And the second scenario is an attack. Let's create a new sequence In NodeName, write Attack.
Let's add one Task to this sequence - MoveTo. We will move towards our enemy.
Now we need to make a choice - which of the two options we would like to launch. For this, there is a special
node called Selector. It launches child trees from left to right.
If the execution of a subtree ends with Fail, then the next tree is launched, and so on, that is, if we have a
successful attack, then we will continue to attack, if something goes wrong, for example,
we cannot find the path to our location, then it will start next subtree. In our case, this is a
patrol sequence. Let's add the service we created. The service can be added to any node in the behavior tree.
We can add to the sequence. Right-click on the AddService node and see our EnemyService.
The enemy search service should always work, so it is reasonable to add it to the topmost node,
to our selector. Add a service. FindEnemy node name, as we specified in the constructor.
In property, you need to specify a key for our enemy. Choose EnemyActor. Below there are settings for
the refresh rate of the Tick function. We will leave them by default, that is, from an optimization point of view, we
can reduce the frequency of the update function of our service. The next thing we need to do is
change MoveTo. We need to move to the EnemyActor position. We select MoveTo and on the right we see
that we cannot select the EnemyActor key. Let's go to blackboard. Let's select EnemyActor
and in the settings we see that you can specify the base class. By default, it also stands for Object. We can change
it to Actor. UObject has no transformation in the world. So MoveTo just won't work. Now our key has
become available. You also need to set property ObserveBlackboardValue to true. If the key changes,
then the target location for MoveTo will be recalculated, and if EnemyActor is nullptr,
then this node will return the Fail status and we will move on to the next RandomRoam branch.
Let's see how it works visually. Leave the behavior tree window open. Move it to the right. We start the game.
The first sequence didn't work. Actor began patrolling the area. The service finds the enemy.
This can be understood because the enemy character is looking at our character and the attack will begin only
if, at the end of the RandomRoam sequence, the EnemyActor object is non-zero,
but I would like the NPC to immediately change the behavior as soon as he notices us. Let's see how
you can do this. For such purposes, there is a special node called Decorator.
This node contains a logical condition, in case of non-fulfillment of which, you can stop the entire subtree.
Right-click on the node. In the menu item, select AddDecorator.
We see some of the possible options that are in the library. Let's select the topmost one.
It's called blackboard. This decorator checks if we have a key set in the blackboard or not.
Select the decorator. In the settings, let's name it HasEnemy. And a little higher in the blackboard category, let's
check if the EnemyActor object is null. There are two options IsSet or IsNotSet.
If we have an enemy, then we perform the Attack sequence, and if there is no enemy, then we need to stop this sequence.
This is done using property ObserverAborts. Select self and the nodes that will be stopped are
highlighted in green . And when actor is installed, we will stop the RandomRoam branch.
So let's add the same decorator to the second sequence.
Selecting blackboard.
Called it NoEnemy.
Change the blackboard key to EnemyActor. Change KeyQuery to IsNotSet,
that is, if it is null, and also set ObserverAborts to self. Let's see how it works for us. We start the game.
EnemyActor is zero, so the character randomly runs around the scene.
And as soon as EnemyActor ceases to be zero, the Attack sequence begins to execute and vice versa.
That is, thanks to the decorators, we instantly switch between our sequences.
So, we are done with the service. Let's add the following: we will not run to the point where the enemy is, but just like
with patrolling, we will find a certain point in a radius around the enemy. You can add a separate Task
for this. We will slightly improve the existing Task - NextLocation.
Open the NextLocationTask header file. Let's create an additional boolean property.
This variable will be responsible for whether we want to find a new point on the navigation mesh
relative to ourselves, or relative to another actor.
And we create an additional property FBlackboardKeySelector.
It will store the key for the object, relative to which we will find a
random point on the navigation mesh and call the property CenterActorKey.
We will also add meta information so that this property is active in the editor only
when the SelfCenter value is false. You and I have already done this.
Go to the .cpp file. Let's create an additional variable called Location. This variable will be
passed to the GetRandomReachablePointInRadius function. The variable is of type FVector
and we assign to it the default value of the location of our pawn and also immediately pass it to the function.
And if the SelfCenter parameter is false, then we must replace this location with the position of the
actor, which is in the blackboard under the name of the key that we specified in the property.
Let's create an additional variable, let's call it CenterActor.
You can immediately cast to the actor, because through the blackboard we will get a pointer to the UObject.
And we get a pointer to an object by calling the GetValueAsObject function.
And we pass our key CenterActorKey as a parameter to this function.
And if the object is null, then we can return the result Failed.
And if it is nonzero, then we assign the position of this actor to the Location variable - CenterActor-> GetActorLocation ().
Launch the editor. Let's delete the MoveTo node. Copy NextLocation from another branch.
Connect the arrows in the Attack sequence. In this sequence, in the NextLocation node, we need to set
SelfCenter to false and specify EnemyActor in CenterActorKey. You can also change the radius, for example, put 500.
Let's see how this works. We start the game.
The character doesn't see anyone.
We fall into line of sight and the NPC starts running around us.
A little later in this section we will improve this approach, because the point can be
close enough to our character and the NPC will crash into us. Everything. Thus, we learned how to
make services, considered decorators and the selector node. In the next lesson, we move on to shooting.